Overview

Pneumonia is an infection in one or both lungs. Bacteria, viruses, and fungi cause it.

coughing that may produce phlegm (mucus)
fever
sweating or chills
shortness of breath that happens while doing normal activities or even while resting
chest pain that’s worse when you breathe or cough
feelings of tiredness or fatigue
loss of appetite
nausea or vomiting
headaches
Other symptoms can vary according to your age and general health:

Children under 5 years old may have fast breathing or wheezing.
Infants may appear to have no symptoms, but sometimes they may vomit, lack energy, or have trouble drinking or eating.
Older people may have milder symptoms. They can also exhibit confusion or a lower than normal body temperature.

Causes of pneumonia
There are several types of infectious agents that can cause pneumonia.

Bacterial pneumonia
The most common cause of bacterial pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumoniae. Other causes include:

Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Legionella pneumophila
Viral pneumonia
Respiratory viruses are often the cause of pneumonia. Some examples include:

influenza (flu)
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
rhinoviruses (common cold)
Viral pneumonia is usually milder and can improve in one to three weeks without treatment.

Fungal pneumonia
Fungi from soil or bird droppings can cause pneumonia. They most often cause pneumonia in people with weakened immune systems. Examples of fungi that can cause pneumonia include:

Pneumocystis jirovecii
Cryptococcus species
Histoplasmosis species
Types of pneumonia
Pneumonia can also be classified according to where or how it was acquired.

Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP)
This type of bacterial pneumonia is acquired during a hospital stay. It can be more serious than other types, as the bacteria involved may be more resistant to antibiotics.

Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) refers to pneumonia that’s acquired outside of a medical or institutional setting.

Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP)
When people who are using a ventilator get pneumonia, it’s called VAP.

Aspiration pneumonia
Aspiration pneumonia happens when you inhale bacteria into your lungs from food, drink, or saliva. This type is more likely to occur if you have a swallowing problem or if you’re too sedate from the use of medications, alcohol, or other drugs.

Pneumonia treatment
Your treatment will depend on the type of pneumonia you have, how severe it is, and your general health.

Prescription medications
Your doctor may prescribe a medication to help treat your pneumonia. What you’re prescribed will depend on the specific cause of your pneumonia.

Oral antibiotics can treat most cases of bacterial pneumonia. Always take your entire course of antibiotics, even if you begin to feel better. Not doing so can prevent the infection from clearing, and it may be harder to treat in the future.

Antibiotic medications don’t work on viruses. In some cases, your doctor may prescribe an antiviral. However, many cases of viral pneumonia clear on their own with at-home care.

Antifungal medications are used to fight fungal pneumonia. You may have to take this medication for several weeks to clear the infection.

At-home care
Your doctor may also recommend over-the-counter (OTC) medication to relieve your pain and fever, as needed. These may include:

aspirin
ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin)
acetaminophen (Tylenol)
Your doctor may also recommend cough medicine to calm your cough so you can rest. Keep in mind coughing helps remove fluid from your lungs, so you don’t want to eliminate it entirely.

You can help your recovery and prevent a recurrence by getting a lot of rest and drinking plenty of fluids.

Hospitalization
If your symptoms are very severe or you have other health problems, you may need to be hospitalized. At the hospital, doctors can keep track of your heart rate, temperature, and breathing. Hospital treatment may include:

intravenous antibiotics injected into a vein
respiratory therapy, which involves delivering specific medications directly into the lungs or teaching you to perform breathing exercises to maximize your oxygenation
oxygen therapy to maintain oxygen levels in your bloodstream (received through a nasal tube, face mask, or ventilator, depending on severity)